Database Management System Project Ideas  and Guidelines  
Guidelines:  
1. Project groups will be same as that of the mini -project groups.  
2. Final report submission and demonstration will be done by April 15th . There will be intermediate 
evaluations.  
3. Project will be evaluated based on the volume of work, and completeness.  
4. Some broad project ideas are given below. You are free to choose other ideas too. Multiple groups may take 
up the same project idea.  
5. You have to submit a concrete project  proposal within a week and get it approved by us.  
Deliverables: Report on the project (with group member names and roll numbers) and a demonstration. Report 
length should be around 10 pages.  
The report content would be:  
1. Title and team members  
2. Object ive 
3. Methodology  
4. Results/Screenshots  
5. References  
 
Project Proposal due in a Week mentioning:  
1. Group details  
2. Project Title  
3. Abstract  
4. Weekly Work Plan  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
 
Broad Project Idea s: 
A. Projects on Logical Database Design for Specialized Databases:  
1. Spatial Databases for Disaster Management:  
Design and populate a database of road networks, population, water level etc is provided from multiple data sources. 
The goal of the project is to provide an information system for decision support in disaster management tasks like 
evacuation, relief. It is part of a larger project for National Spatial Data Infrastructure specific to coastal disaster 
management system in Eastern coast o f India. The database should be supported by a web interface. Data may be 
pulled from the Google Earth Engine.  
Similar spatial database project ideas are listed in: https://sites.go ogle.com/view/summerofearthengine/projects  
 
2. High QPS Text Search Engine  
Objective: The project will use the Apache Solr framework running on ZooKeeper framework to develop scalable text 
search engines.  
Methodology: Develop keyword based search engine.  Do some benchmarking, to see how search performance scales 
in a very high query per second (QPS) setting. QPS can be obtained using either something like a multithreaded HTTP 
client using a ThreadPool and ConnectionPool, or by using a tool like Siege, tha t can simulate multiple concurrent HTTP 
requests on a server.  
Solr is an open source enterprise search platform from the Apache Lucene project. Its major features include full -text 
search, hit highlighting, faceted search, dynamic clustering, database int egration, and rich document (e.g., Word, PDF) 
handling. Providing distributed search and index replication, Solr is highly scalable.  Siege is an http load testing and benchmarking utility. It was designed to let web developers measure their code under dure ss, to see how it will stand 
up to load on the internet. Siege supports basic authentication, cookies, HTTP and HTTPS protocols. It lets its user hit 
a web server with a configurable number of simulated web browsers. Those browsers place the server “under siege.”  
 
Outcome: QPS data outcome using multithreaded http clients with the help of seige connection pool and thread pool.  
3. Large scale graph processing  
The goal of the project is process large graphs in a database  
i. Install any graph processing sys tems e.g., ApacheGraph, Pregel (GoldenOrb), Giraph, or Stanford GPS, ii. Load a large 
graph from Stanford SNAP large graph repository  
iii. Provide interface to run simple graph queries. Bonus for computing PageRank.  
iv. Profile performance  
 
4. XML datab ase  
Build a XQuery interface for the Wikipedia/DBLP XML data. The interface should support structured as well as 
unstructured queries.  
5. Multimedia database  
Build a multimedia database consisting of text/structured data/music/images/video. Public data m ay be downloaded 
to populate the database. Basic queries should be supported.  
 
6. Temporal Databases  
The goal of the project is to build a platform for quick query and  processing of time series financial data. Checkout 
timescale for  inspiration:  https://d ocs.timescale.com/tutorials/latest/financial -tick-data/  
 
7. Datalog query language  
Datalog is a query language based on the relational calculus. Write datalog programs for a graph database to answer 
various graph queries.  
8. QBE: Query By Example  
Microsoft Access is a QBE platform. The goal of this project is to develop a QBE platform for a database application  
9. Semi -structured Query Languages  
XML provides a framework for handling semi -structure data. DBLP/Wikipedia are examples of large collecti ons of XML 
data. They may be downloaded freely  
• Deliverable: Build a XQuery interface for the Wikipedia/DBLP XML data. The interface should support structured as 
well as unstructured queries.  
10. NoSQL Databases  
The data models used by NoSQL databases are  usually based on key/value pairs, document stores, or networks. 
Implementations include: MongoDB, Cassandra, Hbase A noSQL database is designed to support Very large collections 
of data High throughput with data from streams support tree or graph models f or its data support heterogeneous 
collections of data  
Deliverable: A NoSQL database for an application like BTP project report management system  
11. Design a MLops and HITL database  
Based on VertaAI or Apache ModelDB to manage ML experiments, models and me tadata, extend the same or design 
a new database to store and incorporate human evaluations such as labeling and reviews as part of the ML pipeline.  
B. Database Connectivity  
12. Client -side database  Build a Javascript library that client -side Web applicati ons can use to access a database; This layer should cache objects 
on the client side whenever possible, but be backed by a server -side database system.  
As a related project, HTML5 browsers (including WebKit, used by Safari and Chrome), include a client -side SQL API in 
JavaScript. This project would involve investigating how to usersuch a database to improve client performance, offload 
work from the server, etc.  
13. Mobile Databases  
Data Management for Ad Hoc Mobile Workgroups - Groups of people can form tem porary electronic collaboration 
groups using their smartphones. Although group interaction often involves working on a shared document or 
database, modern smartphones give very little support for local group management, and almost none for the data 
product s that groups create. It should be possible for physically - nearby groups to create temporary data storage areas 
with some standard features: reliable storage, versioning, preserved user \ identity, report generation, query 
processing of the shared data, an d so on.  
14. Sensor Network databases  
ITKgp Bus Tracker: Design an information system to track the buses within IITKgp campus. On board GPS systems 
output can be obtained from the smartphone of a student onboard. Goal is to build a smartphone interface to get 
updates about nearest bus, expected arrival time etc on a map to the students.  
15. Web Mashups  
In this project you can connect a number of web services provided as APIs like google/bing map, instagram, twitter 
and combine them to provide interesting ap plications. Exact mashups may be decided by you. Examples include, 
geotwitter, integrating google map with twitter etc.  
C. Projects on Buffer Management  
16. Simulating Buffer Manager Strategies  
The of this project is to simulate a small buffer pool for simple Join/Selection queries on few small tables in the C/C++ 
language. Popular buffer manager strategies like LRU/MRU/CLOCK/Pinned blocks may be simulated. The strategies 
may be compared in terms  of the number of disk i/o required.  
You may use the SQLite C Library for more realistic simulation. https://sqlite.org/index.html  
D. Indexing and Hashing  
17. High Dimensional Indexing  
Implement the R -Tree/KD -Tree for high dimensional indexing. You may cho ose a high dimensional data 9say, audio or 
image) and use the tree to index and search it.  
18. Implementing Extendable Hashing  
Implement the extendable hashing algorithm. Implement the data structures for the hash table. Assume only data 
expansion occurs. Benchmark the access time on a suitable dataset. You may compare it with the SQLite 
implementation.  
19. Auto -admin for Index Creation  
Given a set of query workloads and some table statistics along with a index storage budget write a program to deci de 
the best indices to create. Auto -admin tools are often available to recommend indices, etc. Design a tool in SQLite that 
recommends a set of indices to build given a particular workload and a set of statistics in a database.  
E. Query Processing  
20. Exte rnal Memory Join Algorithms  
Implement external memory join computation algorithms and profile their performance on large data sets.  21. Metric Reporting  
Build a wrapper/interface which collect query processing metrics like table statistics, CPU/memory usag e in run time 
while executing a query. You may use the inbuilt commands of Postgres.  
22. Rule based query rewriting  
Specify some fixed rules for query optimization. Write a query rewriter for simple queries which takes as input a 
relational algebra query a nd returns its optimal version.  
23. Simple Query Processor  
Write a query executor for in -memory data  
– Parse simple SQL DML commands and generate execution plans to evaluate  
– Implement plan nodes for sequential scans, sorting, grouping/aggregation, joins  
– Use a heuristic -driven plan optimizer  
– Experiment with different strategies, measure performance  
 
24. Simple Query Optimizer  
Write a cost -based query planner/optimizer  
– Take simple, unoptimized execution plans as input  
• Will need an appropriate repres entation of query plan nodes  
– Output optimized execution plans, along with associated cost measure  
– Need to properly cost different plan nodes Use (faked) table statistics to choose optimal plans Take CPU, memory, 
disk requirements into account  
– Integra te a mechanism for limiting search effort of optimizer  
 
F. Distributed Databases  
 
25. Design of large, heterogeneous, distributed database systems  
The goal of the project is to design a large database running on a distributed map -reduce platform that can handle 
heterogeneous data obtained from different sources. The map -reduce distributed Hadoop platform will be used. The 
database will use Apache Hba se system as the table structure. It will integrate multiple data sources using the Protocol 
Buffer architecture.  Such databases are common in processing of large and unstructured data common in search 
engines and online social networks.  
Steps:  
1. Instal l Hadoop/Hbase on a laptop/server cluster  
2. Load data to nodes  
3. Write map -reduce operations  
4. Pipe map -reduce outputs using Protocol Buffer  
5. Run simple queries  
Technologies Involved: Hadoop, Apache Hbase, Protocol Buffers  
Data APIs (each group may select a separate data and appropriate queries):  
Twitter, Amazon public data sets ( http://aws.amazon.com/datasets ) 
26. Datawarehouse on Hadoop  
The goal of the project is to run the Hive data warehouse system on Hadoop. And run aggregate/ reporting queries on 
large data sets in a map -reduce framework.  
Steps:  
1. Install Hive on Hadoop running on a laptop/server cluster  
2. Load data to Hive  
3. W rite and execute queries in HiveQL  
27. Text search in a map -reduce framework  
The project will use the Apache Solr framework running on ZooKeeper framework.  
In this project you will develop a keyword based search engine. Then do some benchmarking, to see how search 
performance scales in a very high query per second (QPS) setting. QPS can be obtained using either something like a multithreaded HTTP client using a ThreadPool and ConnectionPool, or by using a tool like Siege, that can simulate 
multiple concur rent HTTP requests on a server. Solr is an open source enterprise search platform from the Apache 
Lucene project. Its major features include full -text search, hit highlighting, faceted search, dynamic clustering, 
database integration, and rich document (e. g., Word, PDF) handling. Providing distributed search and index replication, 
Solr is highly scalable. Siege is an http load testing and benchmarking utility. It was designed to let web developers 
measure their code under duress, to see how it will stand up  to load on the internet. Siege supports basic 
authentication, cookies, HTTP and HTTPS protocols. It lets its user hit a web server with a configurable number of 
simulated web browsers. Those browsers place the server “under siege.” Outcome is a high QPS d ata search 
benchmarking results using multithreaded http clients with the help of seige connection pool and thread pool.  
 
G. Database Security  
28. Implementing database security  
Preventing denial -of-service attacks on database systems. Databases are a vuln erable point in many Web sites, 
because it is often possible for attackers to make some simple request that causes the Web site to issue queries asking 
the database to do a lot of work. By issuing a large number of such requests, and attacker can effective ly issue a denial 
of service attack against the Web site by disabling the database. The goal of this project would be to develop a set of 
techniques to counter this problem — for example, one approach might be to modify the database scheduler so that 
it do esn’t run the same expensive queries over and over. SQL injection queries may also be studied  
 
H. Database Tuning  
29. Performance Analysis of Databases  
Many modern architectures and OS are designed for database \ workloads. Designing systems for large distributed 
database workloads is an interesting problem. Performance monitoring is an important portion of data -center and 
database management. An interesting project consists in developing a monitoring interface for Postgresql, capable of 
monitoring mult iple nodes, reporting both DBMS internal statistics, and OS -level statistics (CPU, RAM, Disk), 
potentially automating the detection of saturation of resources. You may use some benchmark like TPC etc.  
 
I. Databases and ML  
30. ML Application on a Database  
Modern databases often have integrated machine learning functionalities. This includes LLM support. The goal of this 
project is to build a DBMS+ML application for a suitable problem. vThe project involves integrating SQL queries with 
machine learning on dat abases. The postgresML platform may be explored.  
 
31. LLM SQL  
The goal of this project is to build a LLM for generating SQL queries from natural language questions. User asks 
questions in a natural language and the system generates answers by converting th ose questions to an SQL query and 
then executing that query on PostgreSQL database. Any open source LLM may ne used. Example: Create a database 
on CDC information about placements. A student may ask questions such as,  
• How many ML companies will visit cam pus in March?  
• What were the programming skills of students who got offers exceeding 20LPA  
 